feat: add first rate limiting article (#594)
fiberplane/fiberplane: www/src/content/blog/2025-05-21-rate-limiting-hono-apps-intro.mdx

## Uniquely identifying clients

Both the standard and Cloudflare-specific middleware require a `keyGenerator`, which takes Hono `Context` as an argument and must return a string key. This key is used to distinguish between records in the limiter store, so for most use-cases it should be unique to each client.

While many rate limiting examples use the client IP for convenience, this isn’t recommended for production apps. IP addresses aren’t guaranteed to be unique, and bad actors can easily spoof IPs or obscure them with a VPN. 

A user or account ID is the best option for most use-cases, since their uniqueness makes it easier to apply rate limits fairly and accurately. This is essential for premium APIs and other subscription services, which promise customers a defined level of access for each payment tier.

### When to rate limit by IP

Rate limiters protecting pre-login or unprotected routes are a notable exception. Uniquely identifying clients is more difficult in these cases, but also less relevant to the limiters’ role, which is focused on security and capacity management more-so than regulating individual client usage.

> In auth workflows, rate limiters make attempts to gain unauthorized access to the system logistically challenging or prohibitively exepensive. Since users only need to submit their credentials once, any IPs that exceed a reasonable rate limit are suspicious, and may even be blocked after repeated violations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In auth workflows, rate limiters make attempts to gain unauthorized access to the system logistically challenging or prohibitively expensive. Since users only need to submit their credentials once, any IPs that exceed a reasonable rate limit are suspicious, and may even be blocked after repeated violations.
```

> Atomic operations are completed as a single unit, even if they have multiple steps. This prevents race conditions that could result in conflicting limits results. I’ll discuss this topic more in the next article on rate limiting algorithms.
>

[Redis](https://redis.io/docs) is a popular choice, both because it is extremely performant, and because it makes it easy to run multi-step operations atomically. Other in-memory databases like Memcached or Cloudflare KV can also be used, though they are geared towards caching and don’t offer robust support for atomic operations.

Application architecture is arguably the most important factor though. Modern development patterns like distributed applications and edge functions introduce challenges and constraints that affect not just where data is stored, but also how it’s managed.

### Distributed limiting

While a centralized store makes rate limit records available across requests and app instances, it introduces a request-processing bottleneck. A flood of requests from instances around the world can bog down the database, causing even legitimate requests to lag or time-out.

> When paired with distributed application architecture, a centralized store can also add significant latency. After reaching the handler, each request must first be diverted to the limiter—possibly in a different region—before returning to the handling server for processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In distributed applications, centralized stores can also introduce significant latency. After reaching the handler, each request must first be diverted to the limiter—possibly in a different region—before returning to the handling server for processing.
```

slight reword, for brevity

In the era of edge functions (and runtimes), it’s no surprise that distributed rate limiters are increasingly popular. This strategy involves colocating a limiter data store with each app instance, thereby substantially reducing latency and avoiding a single point of failure.

Of course, distributed rate limiters bring their own set of challenges. As with any distributed database, updates must be synchronized across instances. This ensures that users can’t bypass the limit simply by changing their “location” with a VPN. Special care must also be taken to mitigate race conditions, especially when using non-unique identifiers like IPs.

### Data storage with `hono-rate-limiter`

> At the heart of `hono-rate-limiter` are it’s stores. These are adapters that implement the Fixed Window algorithm and communicate with the persistence layer. The library includes a Redis store compatible with a most Redis clients, as well as stores for Cloudflare [KV databases](https://developers.cloudflare.com/kv/) and [Durable Objects](https://developers.cloudflare.com/durable-objects/). It can also be paired with a [half-dozen third-party stores](https://github.com/@upstash/redis), and developers can build their own to connect with a different database or use an alternative algorithm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the heart of `hono-rate-limiter` are its stores. These are adapters that implement the Fixed Window algorithm and communicate with the persistence layer. The library includes a Redis store compatible with a most Redis clients, as well as stores for Cloudflare [KV databases](https://developers.cloudflare.com/kv/) and [Durable Objects](https://developers.cloudflare.com/durable-objects/). It can also be paired with a [half-dozen third-party stores](https://github.com/@upstash/redis), and developers can build their own to connect with a different database or use an alternative algorithm.
```

> At the heart of `hono-rate-limiter` are it’s stores. These are adapters that implement the Fixed Window algorithm and communicate with the persistence layer. The library includes a Redis store compatible with a most Redis clients, as well as stores for Cloudflare [KV databases](https://developers.cloudflare.com/kv/) and [Durable Objects](https://developers.cloudflare.com/durable-objects/). It can also be paired with a [half-dozen third-party stores](https://github.com/@upstash/redis), and developers can build their own to connect with a different database or use an alternative algorithm.

Reviewer: also i think the link is broken - 

https://github.com/@upstash/redis is a 404

maybe use https://github.com/upstash/ratelimit-js or https://upstash.com/docs/redis

## Communicating rate limits

To improve user experience—and to help clients avoid accidentally hitting rate limits—it’s helpful to share rate limit and usage data with clients. In the simplest case, servers return a `429` error when a rate limit is exceeded. This isn’t especially helpful though, regardless of whether the client is an internal front-end, or an end-user. For this reason, both success and error responses often include rate limit information in their headers.

> Rate limiters protecting auth logic from attacks are a notable exception. In these cases it is recommended to share as little as possible. Any details about the limit or when it resets make it easier to bypass limits, automate attacks, or avoid detection.
> 

### Rate limit headers

Though the standard format for rate limit headers has changed over time, the information shared has remained largely consistent:

> - **Policy:** The service’s request limit and and window length in seconds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Policy:** The service’s request limit and window length in seconds.
```
